---
layout: post
title: SLAM (Simultaneous Localization And Mapping)
description: 
category: 
tags: [slam]
author: behnazshirmohamadi
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# What is this SLAM?

SLAM (Simultaneous Localization And Mapping) tries to answer two key questions
in Robotics:

  * Robot Localization: “Where is the Robot?”
  * Robot Mapping: “What does the world around the Robot look like?”

SLAM can help you solve the problem of building up a map within an unknown
environment (without _a priori_ knowledge), or to update a map within a known
environment (with _a priori_ knowledge from a given map), while at the same
time keeping track of the current location of the robots in the environment.

## Some possible SLAM applications

  * Oil pipeline inspection
  * Ocean surveying and underwater navigation
  * Mine exploration
  * Coral reef inspection
  * Military applications
  * Crime scene investigation
  * Earthquake surveillance procedures

## Requirements

In order to implement SLAM, you need a mobile robot and a range measurement
device, such as a laser scanner, a sonar device or a camera (visual SLAM).

## How to implement SLAM

The goal of the SLAM process is to use the data obtained by the robot's
ranging sensors in order to update the position of the robot and the map of
the world around it. A very basic localisation process consists of a numbers
of steps:

  1. Move 
  2. Estimate position ([odometry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Odometry)) 
  3. Sense features 
  4. Map and localization update

This is indeed a naive approach, because robot odomety of an unknown
environment is very error-prone and the result of such an approach would be an
inconsistent map. Therefore as an corrected version, SLAM uses a probabilistic
approach consisting of the following steps:

  1. Move 
  2. Predict position (odometry) 
  3. Sense features 
  4. Recognize landmarks (data association) ⇒ loop closure 
  5. Correct position (probability theory)

In this new approach, the ranging sensor data and odometry data are combined
to correct the perception of the robot about its location and the position of
environmental feature.

This prediction and correction process is described with the aid of some
figures below:

![Robot odometry: prediction of location and correction]({{ site.baseurl }}/attachments/slam1.png)

In the figures, the robot is represented by the triangle. The stars represent
landmarks (environmental features). The robot initially measures the location
of the landmarks, using its sensors (sensor measurements illustrated by the 'lightning').

The robot moves. Based on robot odometry, the robot thinks that is it located
here.

![Robot odometry]({{ site.baseurl }}/attachments/slam2.png)

Once again the robot measures its distance to the landmarks using its range
measurement sensors. What if the odometry and sensor measurements don't match?
The answer is: The robot is not at the location where it thinks it is
(odometry error).

![Robot odometry error]({{ site.baseurl }}/attachments/slam3.png)

The robot has more trust in sensor data than in odometry. So, the new location
of the robot considering the landmarks distances is here. (The dashed triangle
is where the robot thought it was using the odometry data).


![Robot odometry]({{ site.baseurl }}/attachments/slam4.png)

The actual location of the robot is here. You can see that the sensors are not
perfect but their measurements are more reliable than odometry. The lined
triangle is the actual position of the robot, the dotted triangle is its
estimated location based on the sensor data and the dashed triangle is its
estimated location based on odometry.

![Robot odometry and sensor data]({{ site.baseurl }}/attachments/slam5.png)

## Visual SLAM

At DoBots we are mostly interested in projects involving Visual SLAM, where
the range measurement sensor is simply a camera. Using camera as range
measurement device has some advantages such as:

  * It is fast.
  * It has longer range than many other sensors.
  * The sensor data contains more information about the environment rather than the distances.

The basic procedure of Visual SLAM is described in the following figures:

![Visual SLAM]({{ site.baseurl }}/attachments/visual_slam1.png)

The camera localization $$y_i^C$$ depends on three parameters: camera orientation
and camera position (which are given by odometry) and the range measurements
(which is provided by the camera). The yiW

is the camera distance from the landscape from measurement $$z_i$$.

### Predictor-Corrector

At any moment(t) the robot localization can be predicted by the robot location
at(t-1), the robot orientation and the robot position. This prediction will be
corrected by the aid of range measurements as it is shown in below figure:

![Visual SLAM]({{ site.baseurl }}/attachments/visual_slam2.png)

Three stages of the SLAM(Prediction, Observartion and Update) need to be done
based on a recursive algorithm which can derive the Robot state from the noisy
sensor data. One the best known algorithms which is implemented to solve the
SLAM problem is [Kalman filter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalman_filter).

In the following links you can see some SLAM projects realization, done by
different research groups.


## Videos

The following YouTube videos give a nice insight into using visual SLAM:

{% youtube bq5HZzGF3vQ %}

{% youtube gNxmgQ2gofE %}

{% youtube geQOxFiOj_0 %}

## References

  * [Visual SLAM (2007), Andrew Davison, Andrew Calway, Walterio Mayol, BMVC 2007 Visual SLAM Tutorial](http://www.cs.bris.ac.uk/Research/Vision/Realtime/bmvctutorial/bmvcVslamTut07ptI.pdf)
  * [Simultaneous Localization and Mapping: Part 1(2006), Hugh Durrant-Whyte and Tim Baile, IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, P 99-108.](http://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~ajd/Robotics/RoboticsResources/SLAMTutorial1.pdf)
  * [Simultaneous Localizatioand Mapping – SLAM (2005), Andrew Hogu, York University, Toronto, Ontario](http://www.cse.yorku.ca/~hogue/qual_slides.pdf)
  * [SLAM for Dummies: A Tutorial Approach to Simultaneous Localization and Mapping, Søren Riisgaard and Morten Rufus Blas.](http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/aeronautics-and-astronautics/16-412j-cognitive-robotics-spring-2005/projects/1aslam_blas_repo.pdf)


